This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode number 800, recorded on September 2nd, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Well, there's no airplane that's 800, but that's a
pretty good number for this episode. Daniel, congratulations. Yeah, I like 800. I'm happy with
this. I only wish the clinical update had been 80. We should have timed it, so it's
clinical update 78, but it's episode 800, so. I don't know. I think we're going to be doing
this for some time, don't you, Daniel? Yeah, I'm going to do the Anthony Fauci thing where I just
put my hand in my face and say, Oh, my gosh, it's two years into this. And yeah, you know, you
started, I think went in the five hundredths, right? Yes, five hundredths. And yeah, I would not be
surprised if we're not hitting a thousand, you know, and the pandemic is still something we're
talking about is still trying to get through. I remember your, your, I'm sorry, just one more
thing. I remember your first clinical reports were from your car in the hospital parking lot,
remember? I remember that. And then I was like trying to do it in the stairwell, but I was worried
that there was like a crack under the door and the whole ICU had been turned into a theoretical
negative pressure. And so yeah, it's quite a ways. But all right, let's jump in. We have a lot to do
today. And Vincent, you jump in at any point, because I'm going to touch on a few controversial
things. All right. So I'm expecting a lot, a lot of hate mail. Like to get that. Oh, you must be
saying Ivermectin, right? Yeah, we're going to talk about Ivermectin.
So let me return to Winston Churchill. I feel like I'm sort of back in the Winston Churchill
sort of mood. A fanatic is one who can't change his mind and won't change the subject.
So we'll figure out who the fanatic is if it's me or if it's, you know, people that I try to talk
to, you know, I like to keep saying a single point does not make a line. We do keep learning. We do
keep moving forward. So I think people can take a deep breath. You're not going to wake up tomorrow
and find out that, you know, everything we've thought to date is completely wrong. But I'm
going to talk about a number of items right up front. Ivermectin and convalescent plasma.
So Ivermectin has been in the news a lot lately. And I've actually been getting a lot of calls,
a lot of questions about it. And, you know, I think early on, I sort of said that this was
going to happen. And what did I say was going to happen? We are two years into this pandemic.
And we still do not have really clear data on the role of Ivermectin in COVID-19.
We certainly do not know what a correct dose or timing might be if someone wants to use this.
And I am going to say this, you know, the way the media sort of portrays us, I'm going to challenge.
You know, there are certain individuals that I know who are looking at studies out there.
And they they are themselves convinced by the data. I am not convinced by the data for Ivermectin
or is the FDA. But what I think we're all on the same page with is that you should not be using
your horses, your dogs, animal preparations of Ivermectin. I don't think there's any, you know,
any physician that I know or respect who would be advocating that. And even the frontline COVID
critical care alliance, which has been, I'll say, supportive of Ivermectin, they actually came
out with a statement on August 27th, very clearly stating. This is from them. We support the FDA's
direction that humans should never take medication formulations meant for animals. We also agree
that self-dosing of medications without the guidance of a physician is potentially dangerous
and could cause serious harm. So, you know, please stop stealing your dogs, your horses,
or your other animals, deworming medication. You know, it did occur to me, do we deworm cats,
apparently indoor cats don't need to be dewormed. But, you know, you should deworm your dogs.
But we currently do not have the data to know if there is a role for Ivermectin
the treatment of COVID-19. And this has created a vacuum. And I think that's what I talked about,
you know, really about two years ago is Ivermectin is one of the most prescribed and used medications
for people with COVID. And until we really get clear data, that's going to continue. Just, you know,
physicians have the ability to use medications off label. People, as we're seeing, have the ability
to get stuff that they feel that social media is supporting. There are a number of large trials
trying to address this question, right? So in the US, I've talked about this, we have the ACTIV-6
trial. There's the COVID-out trial being run by a friend of mine at University of Minnesota,
the UK, they have the principal trial. There's a lot of trials. You know, this is the way we
move forward in medicine. Science, it's not nothing mysterious. It's really you in a non-biased way.
Ask the question, do people do better with or without a certain therapeutic? So if people are
excited about Ivermectin, and actually did, I emailed Paul Merrick and Pierre Corey, who I know
know well, and he said, hey, maybe on the front of your website, you can actually add ways for
patients to connect with clinical trials. That's really, you know, sort of where I'm going to go
with that. Do you have a comment there, Vincent? So what do you tell people, Daniel, who
right all the time, well, I took Ivermectin and I got better? You know, this goes back to the
three most dangerous words, right? You know, in my experience, right? You can't string anecdotes.
The plot of anecdotes is not data. You know, most people, right, with COVID get better.
Most people that didn't take Ivermectin get better. Most people that took Ivermectin get better.
The question is, if you took Ivermectin, did that increase your chance of getting better?
And there actually is, you know, a problem now, and I'm going to actually, I think I'm going to
bring up the CDC page. There's a bunch of individuals who have had some really horrible
experiences with Ivermectin. And there's actually a CDC brief that they sent out sort of an alert
with actually described cases. There was an adult who drank an injectable Ivermectin formulation
intended for use and cattle. They presented a hospital to confusion, drowsiness, hallucinations,
to kypnea, tremors. They ended up being hospitalized. There was another individual who ended up with
altered mental status after taking Ivermectin tablets of unknown strength purchased on the
internet. So I think that we have to really be clear here. This is not something, you know,
if something works, it might have side effects. And so it's really a balance, you know, drink your
tap water and okay, there's no side effects there, but there's also no efficacy. So yeah,
you know, and I often get patients who ask me, you know, Dr. Griffin, would you recommend Ivermectin?
And I think, as people well know, prior to the pandemic, I was one of the few physicians in the
country with my focus in parasitology using Ivermectin for strong alloydies, for scabies. And we even
had a case of a gentleman at Yale who got way too much steroids and ended up with the strong
alloydies hyperinfection. So yeah, Ivermectin has a certain role in certain patients. We have
yet to have the level of data that I would consider compelling that the FDA would consider
compelling that whatever side effects are outweighed by any benefit. And convalescent plasma, I'm
throwing this right in here at the same time. You know, we still have people that are very
excited about convalescent plasma. And I just really want to say here, the data is in, right? So,
you know, I don't want to prove me wrong. I've said with Ivermectin, we didn't do the trials,
we're still waiting for clear guidance. Convalescent plasma, we spent billions of dollars. The data
is in. And the ID Society of America, the IDSA really has made it clear in their recommendations
based upon the science of recommendation number eight from the IDSA for COVID treatment. Among
patients hospitalized with COVID-19, the IDSA guideline panel suggests against COVID-19 convalescent
plasma in the outpatient setting. Okay, they still say it's reasonable to consider clinical trials,
but not using it outside. And it doesn't matter to me. This, you know, if you get your, you know,
your local B-produced artisanal plasma, the data does not support. I mean, I understand the passion.
People are excited. The data is in. This does not really have a role in the treatment of COVID-19.
All right. So make sure I get those. What are they? Mail those Daniel at microbe.tv.
That's right. All right. Children COVID, mental health. Now, children are at risk if they get
COVID. I think that is now really clear. And I keep saying wearing a mask is less dramatic for
childhood being hospitalized. I'm going to throw in here, not only children, but pregnant women,
women who are about to have children. You know, and I've been asked actually to give an update on
pregnancy and COVID-19. And we certainly have much more data now than I was first asked this
question live on CNN back in March 2020. When they prepped me, I would be talking about the
president and testing and then boom. Dr. Griffin, tell us about pregnant women in COVID.
Said that seems a little bit different than what we were going to discuss. But anyway,
the article characteristics, oh, I was wearing the same bow tie. So just to bring everyone back
to that day, I'll mess with it. The article characteristics and outcomes of women with COVID-19
giving birth at US academic centers during the COVID-19 pandemic was published in as a
peer reviewed article in JAMA Network Open. And I think it really gives us a solid overview of how
devastating COVID-19 can be for pregnant women. For some time, we've been encouraging vaccination
before, during, after pregnancy. And here's a little bit of data. Not only do we know it's safe,
but what is driving this? What can happen if a pregnant person gets infected with COVID? So
this was a retrospective cohort study. They looked at 869,079 adult women
within this cohort, 18,715 of the women had COVID-19. And they found what did they find? The women
with COVID-19, the pregnant women with COVID-19 were more likely, if they got infected with COVID-19,
right, to have a preterm birth, right? So the negative impact on the baby, significantly higher
rates of ICU admission, significant odds of ending up getting intubated, mechanical ventilation,
that was up by about 14-fold. And they were 15 times as likely to die if they ended up in the
hospital, right? So these are vaccine preventable tragedies for the mothers and the babies. And
as per the CDC numbers, we are seeing over a thousand new infections per week in pregnant
people, right? So these are vaccine preventable tragedies. So pregnant women, they should get
vaccinated. Don't wait for any particular trimester. The earlier in the pregnancy,
the better chance that they're going to have the ability to not only protect themselves,
the unborn child, but also when that child is born, the ability to pass those 80 bodies.
I also want everyone to suggest people bookmark on their computer. I have a few things that I
bookmark, you know, where I keep track of what's going on. And one of the things that I bookmark
is the AAP children and COVID-19 state level data. And this is where they keep track of what's
happening in children. And we are now seeing thousands of children each week, thousands of
children each week are being hospitalized for COVID-19. And if you look at that greater than 100,000
people in the US that are currently in the hospital, paying on which state you look at,
that's sort of two to four percent of those hospitalized individuals are children.
So, you know, if not for yourself, get vaccinated and engage in behaviors to protect our children.
And remember, wearing a mask is less dramatic for a child than being hospitalized. So
there was, I'm going to throw this in in this section, and it was where they were looking about
long COVID in children. And I was a little shocked, I guess, confused by the BBC News
interpretation of this. So let me go through the pre-print that the BBC News was talking about.
And this was the pre-print long COVID, the physical and mental health of children and non-hospitalized
young people three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection, a national matched cohort study,
the clock study. So this is a pre-print under review. This was a cohort study of test positive
compared to age, sex, and geographically matched test negative children.
And what they did here is these children completed detailed questionnaires,
three months post this positive test or post not having a positive test.
And this is a challenging paper, I'll be honest. You can imagine if you have an adolescent child
and you start asking them how they feel, there's a lot of background here. So it's really a challenge
sorting out what might be going on relative to background. There's also the challenge here that
there's no universally agreed upon definition of long COVID. And I like to say long COVID is really
a subset of post-acute sequelae of COVID. It's sort of a chronic syndrome where
past includes things like new diagnosis of diabetes, new diagnosis of stroke, other things in there.
And it really was one of the tables that I wanted to go through. So if you go through
this study, and I'm going to encourage people to go ahead and spend some time, hopefully we'll
post this. But they have a really nice table, table three. And here you can look at the different
issues. And I did not find this reassuring. So they asked a number of questions. So one of the
big things we see in long COVID in all ages is this just incredible amount of fatigue. In the
negative, that was 3.3. Three months out, it was still 22.7% of the children were reporting that.
Shortness of breath, 1.5 up to 11.6. 20% of them still couldn't smell. And that was rare.
That was only about one and a half percent in the negative group.
Headaches, right? 4.8% background. This was 26.3%. At three months after
acute COVID in these children. Unusually strong muscle pains, right? A lot of people have these
muscle pains. That was about 1% background. It was 11% in these children at three months.
So I was not reassured when the BBC said, oh, it's much lower than that 80% we were fearing.
I was quite concerned when I'm seeing such high prevalence, three months out of symptoms in these
children. So just to repeat, COVID is a problem in children. They may not die of COVID.
They may be at lower risk of ending up in the hospital than adults, maybe in the one or two
percent of them. But boy, this is a large chunk of kids three months out still suffering.
Transmission, testing, never miss an opportunity to test. Here, there's a bunch of things I feel
like I'm saying over and over again. There was a preprint here. Actually, it wasn't a preprint.
It was published in the MMWR. As much as people criticize the CDC, you'll find out I discuss a
lot of MMWR papers. So kudos to the people at the CDC who keep getting this information out there.
And this, I thought, was very interesting. It was sort of one of several publications
along this line that I saw this last week. And this was outbreak associated with SARS-CoV-2-B1617.2,
the Delta variant, in an elementary school, Marin County, California. And one of the things I really
liked about this was they showed a seeding map, right? And this is where we have an unvaccinated,
symptomatic, infected teacher who does what I see all the time, right? When someone wants to talk,
when they want to generate all those droplets and aerosols, they pull off the mast, right? She
wants to read to the children. And so she was unmasked reading aloud to the class, the majority
of the kids got infected. Everyone in the front row, most of the kids in the second row, yeah,
you really wanted to be in the back. So really, really tough when we talk about, you know,
masking and vaccination in these settings. All right, well, what about testing, right?
Think of, I feel like I go through this talk every time, and I do it every week, every week on
Wednesdays, I do like a COVID clinical update for all our urgent care centers in the tri-state area,
and about 250, 300 providers tune into these. And, you know, it's still shocking to me that
this far into the pandemic, there's still so much misinformation about testing. Now, I will say
that pro New York, Riverside, care amount, pro health, Connecticut, all these parts of Optum
tri-state have really invested heavily in creating access to COVID-19 tests. And each week, a chunk
of my week has spent addressing questions. And one of the biggest challenges, understanding what's
the best test, and whether or not there are certain situations when you may do more than one test.
So the research letter, validation of an at home, at home, direct antigen rapid test for COVID-19,
was published in JAMA Network Open. And I know it's been quite a while since we first sort of
looked at this idea of people having the ability to test themselves at home with rapid tests.
So this study, I think, really builds on things that we keep talking about. This idea that we
talked about last week, that the peak of contagiousness and perhaps the majority of all transmission
from infected individual occurs in the two days prior and the three days following the onset of
symptoms. So during that period of time when there's a very high level of viral RNA load,
when there's a very high level of antigen. So here the investigators follow 257 individuals,
self-collecting nasal swab specimens twice weekly at home during a six-month period.
The investigators were studying a real-world implementation of this high-frequency testing,
using an inexpensive at home, self-administered direct antigen rapid test. So the DART,
D-A-R-T, direct antigen rapid test. And they were then using RTPCR as a comparison.
Now remember, these are individuals, these are not medical experts, these are just people
taking swabs and sticking them up their noses. The individual self-collected these during this
six-month period, the DART sensitivity for that zero to three days was 96.3%. I know a lot of
people keep talking about antigens being low sensitivity tests. If you're looking for someone
who is infectious, who is capable of transmission, 96.3% is not low sensitivity in my book.
Even if you really stretch this out to zero to 12 days after symptom onset, when we're really
starting to get past the point, there's still we're 78.9% sensitive. So I sort of want to even
challenge this concept that antigen tests have an issue with sensitivity. They actually have
great sensitivity if the question is, is this person acutely infected and potentially contagious?
So this does feed into that experience that don't think the plural of anecdotes is data,
because you will when a person comes in, if you do this test, you're going to pick up most people
who are contagious right away within 15 minutes. You're going to be able to pull them out of
circulation before transmission. But there will be a certain number of people who you're catching
either prior to becoming contagious, or you're catching after that. And I will certainly say,
when we're in the hospital, we're looking for a higher sensitivity test, because we're really
asking the question, did you get infected a week or two ago? Because we're usually seeing them
when they're showing up during that early inflammatory phase. So one of the things that I say is,
don't miss an opportunity test. But I guess I'm going to say, don't miss an opportunity to rapidly
get an answer and intervene. If you want to throw a PCR in as a second test, you know,
that's going to make sense in certain situations. And also a test does not predict the future,
right? So you get exposed on Saturday, you have a negative test on Sunday, I would expect that.
You're not going to really start turning positive until about four days later.
Okay, another preprint just posted today, hot off the preprint press. And this really helps
continue along the slides of connecting dots about what happens when a vaccinated person gets
infected with SARS-CoV-2. And this was longitudinal analysis of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine breakthrough
infections reveal limited infectious viral shedding and restrict tissue distribution.
Now, the authors reported on viral dynamics and infectious virus shedding through daily
longitudinal sampling in a small cohort of adults infected with SARS-CoV-2 at various stages of
vaccination, right? So not vaccinated, one dose, two doses. This paper is still binary in terms of
being able to culture virus or not, right? So it doesn't have that quantification that we would
like. But they did report that vaccinated individuals were less likely to test viral culture positive
and that the decay of the viral RNA load was more rapid in vaccinated individuals.
And they also have nice data, again, on antigen tests correlating with the ability to culture
virus. Really continuing to support that narrative, that antigen tests are a great way to jump in
and pick up those people during that infectious period when they're capable of transmitting
virus. And that was in figure one G of this, which I think is worth reading. All right, active
vaccination, never missed an opportunity to vaccinate. And yes, vaccination is how this
pandemic ends. This is actually, I would say this is a pearl. I get this question every so often,
and perhaps our listeners do not realize we have a lot of clinicians that listen. But also,
maybe we have some people still waiting to get vaccinated or maybe people getting ready to get
that third dose. COVID vaccinations don't necessarily have to go in the deltoid. You can actually,
as for the CDC, the anterior lateral thigh can be used. They actually have a nice table,
a 1.5 inch needle may be used if administering the vaccine in this site in the anterior lateral
thigh. Sort of encourage people not to stick needles in the behind. You've got nerves,
blood vessels, the lateral thigh. That's the modern place if you don't want to go into the deltoid.
All right. And why did my pediatrician always give it in my butt? That was that was old school. I
have to bet. Actually, you know, it's funny, I was in the Dominican Republic when this came up.
And in certain parts of the world, people have a lower body mass than in the US. So you actually
see about 1% of the time in some of these populations, you're causing complications. So maybe you had,
you know, I don't know, adequate butt tissue there. But yeah, we've tried to, if you look at the
science on this, it's probably better off to move away from the tail. Okay. Well, we've entered a
period that I'm going to call the Battle of the Vaccines. I see t-shirts on the horizon,
you know, the spike backs and the comeritity t-shirts. But people all want to know, you know,
what is the best vaccine, you know, and what team are you on? And the first, this peer-reviewed
publication that I will talk about, comparison of SARS-CoV-2 antibody response following vaccination
with BNT-162B2 and mRNA-1273. So that's the Pfizer or the comeritity and the spike backs or the
Moderna. And you know, everyone keeps telling us don't look at the antibody titers. But what did
they do? They looked at the antibody titers. And they're twice as high after the Moderna shot.
So of course, we all want to get the Moderna shot now. We also had another pre-print. I got
spike backs, the Moderna, by the way, just saying, comparison of two highly effective mRNA vaccines
for COVID-19 during periods of alpha and delta variant prevalence. And here, they're actually
reporting on what they say is effectiveness, now what does that mean, of the mRNA vaccines.
So what they say here, they look at data from the Mayo Clinic health system,
this period January to July of 2021. We had different variants, you know, alpha and then delta
variant. So first, the reassuring data, right? Both vaccines continue to be highly effective
during this period. Again, SARS-CoV-2 associated hospitalizations. We're looking at 91.6%. We're
looking at 85%. Even when you go into July, right? Still 81%, still 75%. But then they throw in the
new superpower comparison, vaccine effectiveness against infection. And here they say 76% for the
Moderna spike backs, and only 42% for the community Pfizer folks. And then they go ahead. And of
course, just to make it worse, this is a twofold risk reduction against quote unquote breakthrough
infection. They speculate on mRNA content. And Vincent, do you have any comments about this?
Oh, why don't we care about infection? Don't we care just about disease in particular serious
disease? You know, that's an interesting question. And I'm going to the one thing I will say, right?
And I think in general, this is a new thing we're asking vaccines to do we're asking about.
And we're going to get to a study where we look at what if you're vaccinated and you get an
infection, you don't end up in the hospital. What about your risk of long COVID? Do people who are
vaccinated get long COVID? So that I'm going to hold on to that thought because I'm going to talk a
little bit about because that that is going to potentially raise an issue because that is disease,
right? Long COVID is disease. And are the vaccines protecting against that? All right. So passive
vaccination, right? We have a developing story here. So passive vaccination is ideally getting
something a monoclonal and anybody as prophylaxis. So we we got the the ProVent phase three prophylaxis
trial results. They met their primary endpoint. The data was announced. So this was a trial that
included 5197 participants in a two to one randomization to receive this AZD7442 to monoclonal
cocktail or placebo. This is still at the press release stage. They do report that you know,
most of these individuals had comorbidities, right? So putting them at higher risk. And then
they report that this combination reduced the risk of developing symptomatic COVID-19
by 77% compared to placebo. No cases of severe COVID-19 or COVID-19 related deaths in those treated.
In the placebo arm, there were three cases of severe COVID-19. There were two deaths.
So I keep keep pushing on and this I've actually seen a number of emails, number of alerts from
the Catholic health system, which I really applaud. So if my buddies over there are listening,
it's been added as an order set. We send folks over your high risk individual. You've had an
exposure. We get these individuals monoclonals prophylactically. Regeneron actually has
EUA expansion for this. But unfortunately, right, only about a third of eligible patients are getting
this highly effective therapy. If someone is vaccinated, it doesn't matter. If someone is pregnant,
actually, as I think we've discussed, that puts them in a high risk category. And they would be
eligible for this as well. Okay. Now the period of viral replication, but I like to say the time
for monitoring and monoclonals, not the time for antibiotics. And I've talked previously,
and I hit on this early on the active six trial, which is a COVID-19 study of repurposed drugs.
And David Faginbaum was on Twiv 766 talking a little bit about this whole concept of trying to
find stuff on the shelf that might be potentially helpful. This trial is going to investigate
Ivermectin, inhaled flu ticazone, and flu voxamine. So what, what is flu voxamine, right? We've all
heard about Ivermectin, a lot about Ivermectin. We've all heard about steroids like dexamethasone,
here is an inhaled formulation. But what is flu voxamine? Now, flu voxamine is a I'm going to say
a Prozac-like drug. It's an SSRI, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. And we recently had
a preprint. This is the effect of early treatment with flu voxamine on risk of emergency care
and hospitalization among patients with COVID-19, the together randomized platform clinical trial.
So we've been waiting for this for a while. This was a placebo or controlled randomized adaptive
platform trial conducted among symptomatic Brazilian adults, confirmed positive for SARS-CoV-2.
These were patients with a known risk factor for progression to severe disease. The patients
were randomly assigned to either flu voxamine, 100 milligrams twice daily for 10 days, or placebo.
And the primary endpoint was a composite outcome of an emergency room visit for greater than six
hours of observation, or ending up in the hospital in the 28 days post-randomization,
which was an intent to treat analysis. Now, a total of 3,238 patients were allocated.
We ended up with 739 getting flu voxamine. We ended up with 733 in the placebo group. There
actually were other treatments, and there was an N of 1766 for those. What did they find?
The proportion of patients with this composite endpoint of observation in the ER for greater
than six hours or admission to the hospital was lower relative risk 0.71. So about a 29% reduction.
Most of these outcomes, 88% of them, were hospitalizations. They also looked at viral
clearance. They didn't see a difference there. They looked at other outcomes, mortality,
time to death, number of days, ventilated, et cetera. They didn't find anything there. So it
really was just this really, mainly an outcome on the impact of hospitalizations. This is an
interesting study, but this is what active six and other trials are going to address. I really
don't want people to rush out. This is not two years ago where everyone starts rushing out and
putting someone on a drug just because there's one study. This is helpful. This supports
including this in active six. So if you find this exciting, Google, go to clinicaltrials.org,
get your patients connected for active six. Daniel, so of all the things they looked at,
mortality, time to death, days hospitalized, days ventilated. No change except the time you
spend in the emergency room. What does that mean? You know, let's look at Remdesivir, right?
So Remdesivir, $3,000 a course. And all we have is maybe less people spend less time in the hospital,
right? You know, here is a medication. We're not seeing a mortality benefit. There's no crime
against humanity here. We don't have to rush to get this to market. Maybe less people end up in
the hospital. It is a psychiatric drug. So maybe they feel a little bit better. I don't feel like
they need to go to the hospital. It made me think of digoxin, which apparently if you give people
digoxin, they're less likely to go to the hospital. But yeah. Okay. So yeah. Okay.
All right. So we're going to jump to tail. The tail phase, long COVID, post COVID.
We had the article one year outcomes in hospital survivors with COVID-19, a longitudinal cohort
study. This was published in the Lancet. This was an ambideirectional study, meaning it's both
retrospective and prospective phases of the study. COVID-19 survivors who are discharged from this
particular hospital in Wuhan, China, between January 7th and May 29th of 2020. And we have
six month and 12 month follow-up visit questionnaires looking at symptoms, health-related quality of
life questions. These individuals also had a physical examination, a six minute walking test,
and laboratory tests as well. What they reported that the proportion of patients with at least
one sequelae symptom was 68% at six months and 49% at 12 months fatigue muscle weakness were the
most common symptoms. You know, maybe this is why they said in kids that it's better than this.
So by comparison, maybe that's what they were after. But I have to say, long COVID is continuing
to be a tragedy. We do a lot of, let's say, consulting with companies who are trying to figure
out employees that developed acute COVID who now cannot end up back at their pre-COVID
employment. It's about 10 or 12% at these large companies that use UAC as their insurance.
This, this is tough, right? You know, even if you could cut that in half, you'd still be five or
six percent severely affected enough that they can't return to work. One of the things they did
comment, and I think this is consistent what we've seen before, what's predictive of people who end
up with long COVID, which I suggest is a subset of PASC, higher risk for women. Higher risk for
people who receive steroids or had more severe disease, those two may be a little bit intertwined,
right? If you have more severe disease, you may meet criteria for steroids. Now we have,
I'm going to say this is positive news, but then you can tell me if it's positive news,
because this gets back to this issue of do we need to infect, do we need to prevent more than
hospitalizations and deaths? Do we care about infection? And so this was the paper, risk factors
and disease profile of post vaccination, SARS-CoV-2 infection in UK users of the COVID-19
symptom study app, a prospective community-based nested case control study. So actually just COVID,
not COVID-19, I think we're starting to drop COVID-19, it's sort of the only COVID out there.
This was a prospective community-based nested case control study, right? So they've got a big
cohort and they're looking within that. This was self-reported data from this UK-based
database cohort. Everyone was an adult, so greater than or equal to 18 years of age. This is a
mobile phone app that they're using, so really kind of clever here. And then they're going to look
at cases that received a first or a second dose. They're going to look at people that tested
positive. So what were sort of the takeaway from this? So in addition to all the other benefits of
vaccination, which just were sort of reinforced in this study, they found that the odds of having
symptoms for 28 days or more, so long COVID, after post vaccination infection was approximately
halved by having two vaccine doses. So this result suggests that the risk of long COVID
is reduced to individuals who have received double vaccination. This is sort of a little bit
of an issue and I think it's back to that original. I was saying that from our large cohorts,
maybe 10 or 12% of individuals have such severe long COVID, they can't return to work. It's going
to be really interesting to tease out how severe is this long COVID because half of 10 or 12%, half
of those large numbers, if we still have five or 6% of people who get COVID with long COVID,
providing them from going to work, if you take some of those other numbers that we talked about,
68% having a symptom at six months, you drop that to 34. These are still big numbers. So
this does raise the question of considering long COVID as disease. So maybe that gets at my,
like, do we want to protect, want to protect them against infection completely?
I think that what we're really, what I'm really trying to say here is I think long COVID falls
under the disease and one of the things we want to permit. The problem, Daniel, is that this is
different from every other vaccine because there's no long measles, there's no long polio, right?
And so if this is true, and I think we need to know more about what variants we're circulating
and so forth, that could be an issue. I agree. Yeah, no, excellent point. Excellent point.
All right. So I always like to touch on the world situation, right? No one is safe until
everyone is safe. And I think on an upcoming episode, I'm going to probably spend a little time
talking about the Global Vaccine Initiative, discussing GAVI and COVAX, also potentially
give our listeners a little bit of insight into how they might contribute and be part of that effort.
But along those lines, reminders to all our listeners throughout the months of August,
September, October, donations made to PWB are going to support floating doctors.
And let me share an email I just recently got from Jolie Lebrot of floating doctors,
just letting folks know what's going on down there. The team in Panama is fairing well and is
accepting volunteers to begin seeing more patients for primary care. Thankfully, cases in Panama,
including BOCUS are on the decline, though is in the U.S. misinformation spreads as quickly
as the virus itself. Right now BOCUS is getting doses in waves. These are the vaccine doses.
Through the fifth, they will be offering the vaccine in BOCUS Town and on three neighboring
islands. The more remote communities have yet to receive the vaccine, though some of the communities
on the mainland closer to cities have been able to access them. Floating doctors is currently working
hard to educate people about the vaccine and are coordinating with the local ministries of
health to assist in distribution when they become available. So go to parasites.boarders.com,
donate so we can help support the separate.
Yeah, let me go back very briefly to the long COVID. Is it possible that since we don't really
know how long long COVID is, maybe people who are vaccinated, even though 50% may still get it,
maybe it's shorter than non-vaccinated long COVID? Yeah, there's a couple things that this study,
well, there's several things that this study doesn't tell us. And I think it's great that
we're bouncing back to this. You know, this is a, you know, people using a phone app, right? So
there's going to be a little bit of selection bias. If you're done with COVID and moving on with
your life, this may there may be a reporting bias, you're more likely to jump on so that the number
may be different. The severity may be different. And also, this is this is really a short follow
up, right? This is 28 days. You're barely there in my mind. I always say that 28 days is sort of
the early people who are vaccinated. What if we go to two months, three months? I'm still optimistic.
I mean, the biology, the science suggests to me that we should see protection against this type
of disease as well. Yeah, okay. Yeah, I agree. All right, time for some questions for Daniel.
You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. Jeff from California, my wife and I are both
scientists and we are having a serious scientific disagreement by studying the literature. She has
decided that one can be infectious without the tests detecting the infection. She's not talking
about normal false negative rate, but rather, there is a couple of day period before the symptom
onset where some patients can be infectious, but not shedding enough virus to be detected by the
standard tests below the detection threshold of the test. I think that regardless of her reading
around, this is impossible. I suppose this might be slightly possible if somehow the virus is in
your lungs, but not your nose, but where the test is done. But this seems unlikely to me
and what happened in a vanishingly small number of cases. So can you help distinguish between her
reading around and my logic? Thanks. Yeah, I'm going to get in trouble here, right? You know,
your wife is always right, but some of the things she's thinking perhaps need to evolve a little
bit. Our tests are incredibly sensitive. And I think I've talked several times about this large
testing program we have for the movie industry. The test actually, particularly the PCR, turns
positive prior to a person becoming infectious. So yes, the period when the person is mostly
contagious, mostly transmitting is two days before symptom onset, three days afterwards,
but there's a little bit of a tail there to the right. Your PCR turns positive prior to you spray.
If this wasn't true, our whole screening program would have been a disaster, you know, all the
content you're enjoying on, you know, Amazon Prime and Netflix wouldn't be there, a Lionsgate,
et cetera. So no, the tests pick a person up before they become infectious. And actually,
with the PCR continues to pick you up even after you've passed through that period of time.
So the antigen tests tend to correlate more with that period of contagiousness,
high levels of the viral antigen. But I will say the one thing that maybe your wife is right about,
and maybe she was thinking is none of our tests are 100% sensitive. So you're gonna miss stuff,
but you're just missing stuff because of failure of the test, not because of a biology.
Zinta from New York writes, our daughter was born during the pandemic and due to lockdown,
had limited contact to other children and adults. As a result, she's never been sick with colds or
other illnesses. She's now 15 months, we would like to enroll her in daycare for socialization
and learning. However, the increasing rates of COVID and hospitalization and young children is
alarming as you highlight in 797. I worry that by sending my one year old to daycare, I may be
dooming her to COVID-19 with unknown consequences. To minimize risks, would you keep infants and
toddlers out of daycare as long as possible and try to wait for a vaccine, or can risks of infection
be minimized by going to daycare two or three days a week, or by dropping out if prevalence
increases above a certain threshold in the community, or is hospitalization still so rare in toddlers
and infants that we really should not worry about COVID and focus on the benefits of socialization
at this young age? Okay, so there's a lot, a lot in there to unpack, but I'm gonna focus on,
I think the main overriding thing is that we've been talking about for a while, we have presented
several studies on this, is that you can safely get children in schools, you can safely actually
get children under the age of six in these child care settings. There are certain recommended
mitigation strategies to make that safe. I think there was actually a recent study where like
children in school had one third the rate of infection as opposed to the community, right? So
if you look at some of these mitigation strategies, vaccinating the staff, that's huge, right? That's
gonna reduce their chance of getting infected, and I think we have a growing body of evidence,
their chance of spreading it to the others. Regular testing programs, good ventilation,
kids at this age, they're not wearing masks, I think that's just reasonable. But there are ways
to do this safely, and I'm gonna say there's ways to do it safely that that outweigh that sort of
would err on the side of your potentially better off having your child in this setting with all
the advantages of the social interaction, this can be done safely. Jamie writes, I'm an emergency
physician and mom of two ages one and two years old working in Albuquerque, New Mexico. You mentioned
in the last update that the overall risk of hospitalization is two percent for children.
I was wondering if we have more information about that specifically, what's the breakdown
by age group? I would imagine under one year old is most likely to require hospitalization,
but beyond that, what's the median length of stay for these children? What interventions
are being needed? And what is the rate of children requiring intubation? What comorbidities or
other factors contribute to risk of hospitalization? And lastly, what is the rate of MISC or do we
even know? Okay, so this is fantastic, right? This is the kind of questions and knowledge
that you want your physician to seek. And I talked early on in the children in COVID section that
the AAP children in COVID-19 state level data page not only does it have like an overview,
but you can go to the very bottom and you can actually download this extensive PDF with answers
to a lot of the questions that you're asking about. So yeah, as you can imagine, I've looked
through this and there really is a gradation, right? The closer you get to being an adult,
the closer your risks are to those of an adult, the younger you get, the lower those get.
And then I talked a little bit about, depending on where you look in different states, it might
be as low as 1.6 of the hospitalizations are children, other states it's 3.6, but they break
this down into all these different variables, age, state, etc. Thomas writes, my mother suffers
from a few autoimmune diseases, lupus, sojourn syndrome, anti-phospholipid syndrome. She hasn't
been vaccinated yet at a fear of thrombosis. Her doctor could say only that she on the one
hand recommends getting vaccinated, but on the other hand does not recommend it. One problem is
that depending to which doctor she goes regarding her disease in general, some recommend getting
anticoagulants, others tell her she can live without them. So she doesn't take anything against
thrombosis as exercise might be enough and is the more comfortable option. Since I doubt that her
immunity is around the corner anytime soon, my question is, do I want to get infected with or
without vaccine protection? What's the best way to go from here for my mother?
Okay. So there's a lot in there, and there was that one question about a person with lupus. Do
they benefit being on anticoagulation or not? And there are certain features I'm going to defer
to the rheumatologist who can sort of sort that out and make that. But what about COVID, right?
We're saying at this point, your choice is between getting exposed to COVID, having a natural
infection with all the risks and benefits or the vaccine. I am going to recommend, you know,
in a situation like this, I would recommend vaccination because the risks of clotting complications
with COVID are significant. So an individual like this who gets COVID, I would be quite concerned
20, 30% chance of a venous or arterial clotting complication. We probably would recommend an
mRNA vaccine in an individual like this. And the other, I want to use this opportunity,
there was a recent study, and I was going to put it in, but this is even better just to bring it up.
There are a bunch of people say, I've had lots and lots of allergies. I've had issues with other
vaccines. I want a letter from my allergist or doctor saying, I don't have to get this vaccine.
They looked at these individuals and individuals, even with a report of multiple allergies,
all kinds of other issues, 99% of these individuals tolerate these vaccines.
The few like the 1% or so tend to have mild issues. So if you've had an issue with this vaccine or
a component in this vaccine, that's one thing. But if you have autoimmune diseases, if you have
allergies, if you have the other things, we are still routinely recommending vaccination across
the board, much safer than getting COVID. All right. And because this is episode 800, one extra email,
this is a statement that I think we need to make. It's not really a question from Lena,
who says, I know I'm probably preaching to the choir since most of your listeners are like-minded,
but I wanted to send this in. She posted it on her Facebook page in hopes it would give
anti-vaxxers an idea of what life is like for those who are scared. So her child is seven years old.
He has made it to age seven, only through the help of many doctors, medicines, and the alert,
and aware adults in his life. He's medically fragile. He doesn't look it, but he is one of
millions with an invisible illness. He's been in the hospital multiple times, takes multiple
medications every day. He's at high risk. He's why we're continuing to stay home, mask up, get
vaccinated, and only allow vaccinated individuals to visit. If you think a vaccine is traumatic,
imagine watching your child struggle to breathe, gray skinned and blue-lipped. If you think wearing
a mask is too much, imagine watching doctors and nurses pump your child full of medicines
to help him breathe. If you think staying home is hard, imagine a doctor telling you that they're
going to try one more thing, but if it doesn't work, they're going to have to intubate your child
to give him a break from working so hard to breathe. If you think a cold is no big deal,
imagine lying behind your child in a hospital bed, watching the number on the oxygen monitor,
praying it stays above 90 so it doesn't beep and summon the nurse again so you can get five
minutes of sleep. Imagine that, then imagine it again and again. That's only a fraction of
what we've endured as a family. Those things are traumatic. They're too much. They're hard.
They're a big deal. Those things are why we keep him safe. He's not disposable. He's not a burden.
He's very much loved by everyone. He brings joy to our lives. He deserves to be protected,
protect him and the millions of people who suffer from invisible illnesses. Happy birthday, JJ.
Thank you for teaching us so much. Wow. It's a very powerful email. I wish that all the people,
but I was talking about wife today. The polls have gotten to the point where it's down to only
about 20% of people are saying they would refuse to get vaccinated and we think half of those people
may have already been vaccinated. They just don't want to lose membership in the tribe.
So this vaccine has an anti-vaxx population. It's really shrinking. They're very loud.
They're very vocal. But I think a lot of people realize that a lot of people are coming.
This isn't just about you. We live in a community. This is like having a protest
advocating for drunk driving or something. If you get COVID and you transmit it, you could kill
someone else and you could end up, we're seeing thousands of kids end up in the hospital each week.
The majority of those children were infected by someone who's unvaccinated. So that's how the
unvaccinated. Don't just think about yourself. I think our listeners are on board with this.
I also think it's a good response to people say, oh, it's traumatic for kids to wear face masks
in school. As you have said, Daniel, far more traumatic to be in the hospital.
Yeah. Yeah. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 78 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. And everyone, including you, Vincent, be safe.